README.md, before:

<h3>Billion Word Imputation</h3>

<hr height="1" />

_**Find and impute missing words in the billion word corpus**_

For each sentence in the test set, we have removed exactly one word. Participants must create a model capable of inserting back the correct missing word at the correct location in the sentence. Submissions are scored using an edit distance to allow for partial credit.

Submissions are evaluated on the mean Levenshtein distance between the sentences you submit and the original sentences in the test set.

Your submission file should contain the sentence id and a predicted sentence. To prevent parsing issues, you should use double quotes to escape the sentence text and two double quotes ("") for double quotes within a sentence.

<hr height="1" />

**NOTE!** This github repo does not contain the data files because they're simply too big. Get them at the [competition webpage](https://www.kaggle.com/c/billion-word-imputation).

1. **Development Platform**<br>
I'm using an [Acer C720P Chromebook](http://www.google.com/chrome/devices/acer-c720p-chromebook/) running [Ubuntu Trusty 14.04](http://releases.ubuntu.com/14.04/) via [Crouton](https://github.com/dnschneid/crouton). I use [Python 2.7](https://docs.python.org/2/) and I edit all code in [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs).

2. _**Implementation notes**_<br>
The overall idea for producing a result is to<br>1) process the training-file and build up an index of n-grams (currently [bigrams](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigram)) organized alphabetically in separate .pkl files.<br>2) process the test-file line by line, matching two words at a time using the bigram index to decide whether it is more probable that a word should be inserted or not.<br>3) figure out which word is missing by looking at the bigrams and select the most probable.<br><br>

3. _**TODO**_<br>
First and foremost the process of finding the missing word is too slow. There are 306 681 sentences (of varying length) in the test_v2.txt file. Currently we can deal with about 3 sentences per minute (optimistic guesstimate) so I'd only have to wait about 2,5 months before I can send in a submission to Kaggle. I don't know what would be an acceptable run-time and how far I can improve but it needs to count in hours.

4. _**Example session (current)**_<br>

4.1 _solver (step 2 and 3)_ _att1.py_<br>

Running the current test.py and att1.py (with added logging) produces the following output. Performance is slightly worse (for test_index.txt) but this version works better on orig.txt which holds more test sentences.

     $ python test.py test_index.txt
     2014-10-25 13:39:47,362 START
     2014-10-25 13:40:35,397 START
     2014-10-25 13:40:35,399 STOP

     2014-10-25 13:40:35,402 Removing index 1
     2014-10-25 13:40:54,146 Missing index is thought to be: -1 (0.006756%)
     2014-10-25 13:40:54,146 Two studies ... bad for kids .
     2014-10-25 13:40:54,146 Scoring 'Two studies ... bad for kids .'
     2014-10-25 13:40:54,164 id: 1 score: 7 (7)

     2014-10-25 13:40:54,164 Removing index 2
     2014-10-25 13:41:10,752 Missing index is thought to be: 2 (0.000000%)
     2014-10-25 13:41:10,763 Two recent < years > shed ... bad for kids .
     2014-10-25 13:41:10,764 Scoring 'Two recent years shed ... bad for kids .'
     2014-10-25 13:41:10,776 id: 1 score: 6 (8)

     ...

     2014-10-25 13:43:58,520 Removing index 14
     2014-10-25 13:44:14,998 Missing index is thought to be: -1 (0.006756%)
     2014-10-25 13:44:14,998 Two recent ... bad for .
     2014-10-25 13:44:14,998 Scoring 'Two recent ... bad for .'
     2014-10-25 13:44:15,007 id: 1 score: 5 (5)
     id: 1 avg score 4.9286 (5.2857) 14 tests
     Total score 4.9286 (5.2857) 14 tests
     2014-10-25 13:44:15,039 STOP

4.2 _preparation (step 1)_ _build_bigrams.py_<br>

This version of the build bigrams code processes the whole training-file in about 80-90 minutes and spits out 27 bigrams files. I had to move the training file to an SD-card in order to run this.

     $ python build_bigrams.py /mnt/sdb1/train_v2.txt 
     *INFO 1000000 rows, 25378842 words. time 0:00:43.715244 (0:00:43.715622)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 0 -> 24879 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 0 -> 25130 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 0 -> 31650 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 0 -> 2986 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 0 -> 2432 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 0 -> 57855 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:00:24.483303
     *INFO 2000000 rows, 50741379 words. time 0:01:07.021405 (0:01:50.737135)
     *INFO 3000000 rows, 76120838 words. time 0:00:42.238138 (0:02:32.975356)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 24879 -> 36217 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 25130 -> 36145 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 31650 -> 45387 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 16762 -> 17294 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 11609 -> 11889 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 365393 -> 377625 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:05:23.360760
     *INFO 29000000 rows, 735645361 words. time 0:06:06.587985 (1:24:12.863322)
     *INFO 30000000 rows, 761020899 words. time 0:00:41.981535 (1:24:54.844939)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 122690 -> 126081 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 116233 -> 119384 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 150583 -> 154803 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 17294 -> 17807 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 11889 -> 12157 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 377625 -> 389532 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:05:38.637519
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 126081 -> 126769 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 119384 -> 119990 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 154803 -> 155611 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 17807 -> 17904 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 12157 -> 12212 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 389532 -> 391904 keys
     Total processing time: 1:36:13.743612
     Total number of processed lines: 30301028
     Total number of processed words: 768648884

Commit message:

Cached the bigrams between find and replace functions to speed up.
This change reduces runtime with about 25%. I noticed that I was calling
the load_bigrams function in both find_missing_index and in the
replace_missing_word functions. Since it's the same words they could be
re-used. Ideally we should collapse those functions into one. Only
making one pass through the sentence should be more than enough.

README.md, after:

<h3>Billion Word Imputation</h3>

<hr height="1" />

_**Find and impute missing words in the billion word corpus**_

For each sentence in the test set, we have removed exactly one word. Participants must create a model capable of inserting back the correct missing word at the correct location in the sentence. Submissions are scored using an edit distance to allow for partial credit.

Submissions are evaluated on the mean Levenshtein distance between the sentences you submit and the original sentences in the test set.

Your submission file should contain the sentence id and a predicted sentence. To prevent parsing issues, you should use double quotes to escape the sentence text and two double quotes ("") for double quotes within a sentence.

<hr height="1" />

**NOTE!** This github repo does not contain the data files because they're simply too big. Get them at the [competition webpage](https://www.kaggle.com/c/billion-word-imputation).

1. **Development Platform**<br>
I'm using an [Acer C720P Chromebook](http://www.google.com/chrome/devices/acer-c720p-chromebook/) running [Ubuntu Trusty 14.04](http://releases.ubuntu.com/14.04/) via [Crouton](https://github.com/dnschneid/crouton). I use [Python 2.7](https://docs.python.org/2/) and I edit all code in [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs).

2. _**Implementation notes**_<br>
The overall idea for producing a result is to<br>1) process the training-file and build up an index of n-grams (currently [bigrams](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigram)) organized alphabetically in separate .pkl files.<br>2) process the test-file line by line, matching two words at a time using the bigram index to decide whether it is more probable that a word should be inserted or not.<br>3) figure out which word is missing by looking at the bigrams and select the most probable.<br><br>

3. _**TODO**_<br>
First and foremost the process of finding the missing word is too slow. There are 306 681 sentences (of varying length) in the test_v2.txt file. Currently we can deal with about 3 sentences per minute (optimistic guesstimate) so I'd only have to wait about 2,5 months before I can send in a submission to Kaggle. I don't know what would be an acceptable run-time and how far I can improve but it needs to count in hours.

4. _**Example session (current)**_<br>

4.1 _solver (step 2 and 3)_ _att1.py_<br>

Running the current test.py and att1.py (with added logging) produces the following output. Performance is slightly worse (for test_index.txt) but this version works better on orig.txt which holds more test sentences.<br>I've managed to speed up a little bit by caching the bigrams. Previous runs have taken about 4:30 to complete and now we're down to 3:40. Yay!

     $ python test.py test_index.txt
     2014-10-25 22:46:00,423 START
     2014-10-25 22:46:56,359 START
     2014-10-25 22:46:56,362 STOP
     
     2014-10-25 22:46:56,365 Removing index 1
     2014-10-25 22:47:12,131 Missing index is thought to be: -1 (0.006756%)
     2014-10-25 22:47:12,133 Two studies ... bad for kids .
     2014-10-25 22:47:12,974 Scoring 'Two studies ... bad for kids .'
     2014-10-25 22:47:13,025 id: 1 score: 7 (7)
     
     2014-10-25 22:47:13,026 Removing index 2
     2014-10-25 22:47:24,372 Missing index is thought to be: 2 (0.000000%)
     2014-10-25 22:47:24,385 Two recent < years > shed ... bad for kids .
     2014-10-25 22:47:24,951 Scoring 'Two recent years shed ... bad for kids .'
     2014-10-25 22:47:24,964 id: 1 score: 6 (8)

     ...

     2014-10-25 22:49:27,716 Removing index 14
     2014-10-25 22:49:39,586 Missing index is thought to be: -1 (0.006756%)
     2014-10-25 22:49:39,586 Two recent ... bad for .
     2014-10-25 22:49:40,137 Scoring 'Two recent ... bad for .'
     2014-10-25 22:49:40,146 id: 1 score: 5 (5)
     id: 1 avg score 4.9286 (5.2857) 14 tests
     Total score 4.9286 (5.2857) 14 tests
     2014-10-25 22:49:40,149 STOP

4.2 _preparation (step 1)_ _build_bigrams.py_<br>

This version of the build bigrams code processes the whole training-file in about 80-90 minutes and spits out 27 bigrams files. I had to move the training file to an SD-card in order to run this.

     $ python build_bigrams.py /mnt/sdb1/train_v2.txt 
     *INFO 1000000 rows, 25378842 words. time 0:00:43.715244 (0:00:43.715622)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 0 -> 24879 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 0 -> 25130 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 0 -> 31650 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 0 -> 2986 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 0 -> 2432 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 0 -> 57855 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:00:24.483303
     *INFO 2000000 rows, 50741379 words. time 0:01:07.021405 (0:01:50.737135)
     *INFO 3000000 rows, 76120838 words. time 0:00:42.238138 (0:02:32.975356)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 24879 -> 36217 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 25130 -> 36145 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 31650 -> 45387 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 16762 -> 17294 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 11609 -> 11889 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 365393 -> 377625 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:05:23.360760
     *INFO 29000000 rows, 735645361 words. time 0:06:06.587985 (1:24:12.863322)
     *INFO 30000000 rows, 761020899 words. time 0:00:41.981535 (1:24:54.844939)
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 122690 -> 126081 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 116233 -> 119384 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 150583 -> 154803 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 17294 -> 17807 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 11889 -> 12157 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 377625 -> 389532 keys
     *INFO saving 27 bigrams took 0:05:38.637519
     *INFO save all bigrams
     *INFO bigrams_A.pkl 126081 -> 126769 keys
     *INFO bigrams_B.pkl 119384 -> 119990 keys
     *INFO bigrams_C.pkl 154803 -> 155611 keys
     ...
     *INFO bigrams_Y.pkl 17807 -> 17904 keys
     *INFO bigrams_Z.pkl 12157 -> 12212 keys
     *INFO bigrams_*.pkl 389532 -> 391904 keys
     Total processing time: 1:36:13.743612
     Total number of processed lines: 30301028
     Total number of processed words: 768648884
